MPs have urged the government to confront the “fundamental failings” of the UK’s parental leave system after it refused to commit to improving paternity pay and leave during the current parliament.
Responding to the WEC’s June report on paternity and shared parental leave, the government acknowledged improvements are needed, but it failed to make any commitment to one of its key recommendations of longer, better-paid paternity leave.
The Women and Equalities Committee (WEC) said the review of the UK’s parental leave system, which was launched in July, was a “watershed moment” but it warned that it will fail working parents if it only “tinkers at the edges”.
UK’s paternity leave offering ‘one of the worst in the developed world’, say MPs
Nearly 4,000 fathers fired for taking paternity leave last year, report finds
Expert panel: can employers make paternity leave work better?
‘One of the worst in the world’
The WEC’s report, Equality at work: paternity and shared parental leave, concluded that the UK’s statutory offer of two weeks’ leave for new fathers is “completely out of step with how most couples want to share parenting responsibilities” and entrenches “outdated gender stereotypes about caring”.
Shared parental leave, introduced in 2015 to give families greater flexibility, has largely failed to take off, with just 3 to 5 per cent of eligible couples using it. Low statutory pay and the exclusion of self-employed parents remain major barriers.
“The UK cannot afford to continue with a parental leave system which has fallen far behind most comparable countries and has one of the worst statutory leave offers for fathers and other parents in the developed world,” said Sarah Owen, chair of the WEC and Labour MP for Luton North.
Ministers said the reforms will be considered under its current review of the parental leave system, which launched in July and will run until the end of 2025.
The review will examine international models such as Germany’s “partnership bonus” and Portugal’s “sharing bonus”, which provide couples with additional paid leave when both parents participate, as well as ways to simplify the system for families and employers.
“The review represents an opportunity to reset our approach to parental leave and pay and what we want the system to achieve. A consideration of shared parental leave will be key to this,” the government said.
It also highlighted the upcoming changes in the employment rights bill, set to take effect in April 2026, which will make paternity pay and unpaid parental leave day-one rights for employees.
Calls for bolder reform
Despite welcoming the review, the WEC expressed disappointment at the lack of immediate commitments, particularly on statutory paternity leave.
“The UK cannot afford to continue with a parental leave system which has fallen far behind most comparable countries and has one of the worst statutory leave offers for fathers and other parents in the developed world,” Owen said. “It is disappointing there is no definite commitment in the government’s response to longer, better paid paternity leave during this parliament, as change is much needed and long overdue.”
Claire McCartney, policy and practice manager at the CIPD, said the existing system “is not fit for purpose” and leaves the UK lagging behind OECD countries on paternity leave and pay.
She urged the government to extend statutory paternity leave to six weeks at or near full pay. “Enhancing and ring-fencing this leave is likely to significantly improve take-up and support fathers and partners to play an active role in their children’s early care and beyond,” McCartney said. “Shared parental leave should also be reformed and simplified for both parents and employers.”
Campaigners also stressed the urgent need to support self-employed parents. George Gabriel, co-founder of campaign group The Dad Shift, said: “Two weeks on less than half the minimum wage, and with nothing for the self-employed, is the least generous system in Europe and it’s past time we fixed it.
“Two weeks might work for a trip to Spain, but to look after your partner, bond with your baby and figure out who you are as a dad? Ridiculous.”
How can HR support new parents?
While long-term reforms remain uncertain, employers are being urged to get ahead of the curve.
Emma Clark, employment partner at Keystone Law, said businesses should prepare for the employment rights bill changes and consider how further reforms could affect workforce planning.
She advised HR teams to consider how to manage longer paternity absences if reforms progress and review cover plans. Employers should also audit their parental-leave policies, benchmark their offerings against competitors and encourage uptake of paternity leave.
Although the government has not committed to changing paternity leave or pay, Clark said forward-thinking employers who improve their offering could benefit from better retention, enhanced loyalty and a stronger reputation among young parents.
Lee Ashwood, partner in employment law at Browne Jacobson, agreed, saying HR can lead the way by fostering a supportive, flexible culture. “Introducing flexible working patterns that suit parents’ childcare needs, scheduling key meetings in advance and avoiding pick-up times can help make flexibility the norm, not the exception,” he said.
